Add animation tutorials to the main tutorials branch (#1915)
ansys/pydpf-core: doc/source/user_guide/tutorials/animate/animate_time.rst

.. _ref_tutorials_animate_time:

======================
Animate data over time
======================

.. |Field| replace:: :class:`Field<ansys.dpf.core.field.Field>`
.. |FieldsContainer| replace:: :class:`FieldsContainer<ansys.dpf.core.fields_container.FieldsContainer>`
.. |MeshedRegion| replace:: :class:`MeshedRegion <ansys.dpf.core.meshed_region.MeshedRegion>`
.. |TimeFreqSupport| replace:: :class:`TimeFreqSupport <ansys.dpf.core.time_freq_support.TimeFreqSupport>`
.. |animate| replace:: :func:`FieldsContainer.animate() <ansys.dpf.core.fields_container.FieldsContainer.animate>`
.. |Result| replace:: :class:`Result <ansys.dpf.core.results.Result>`
.. |Operator| replace:: :class:`Operator<ansys.dpf.core.dpf_operator.Operator>`

> This tutorial shows how to create 3D animations of the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial shows how to create 3D animations of the data in time.
```

To animate data across time you need to get the data stored in a |FieldsContainer| labeled in time.

Get the result files
--------------------

First download a result file such as one available with the `ansys.dpf.core.examples` module.

> For more information about how to import your result file in DPF check

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about how to import your own result file in DPF check
```

.. |Operator| replace:: :class:`Operator<ansys.dpf.core.dpf_operator.Operator>`
.. |Workflow| replace:: :class:`Workflow<ansys.dpf.core.workflow.Workflow>`
.. |Elemental| replace:: :class:`elemental<ansys.dpf.core.common.locations>`
.. |ElementalNodal| replace:: :class:`elemental_nodal<ansys.dpf.core.common.locations>`
.. |Nodal| replace:: :class:`nodal<ansys.dpf.core.common.locations>`
.. |Faces| replace:: :class:`faces<ansys.dpf.core.common.locations>`
.. |Overall| replace:: :class:`overall<ansys.dpf.core.common.locations>`
.. |open_movie| replace:: :class:`pyvista.Plotter.open_movie`

This tutorial shows how to create 3D animations of data in time.

:jupyter-download-script:`Download tutorial as Python script<animate_time>`

:jupyter-download-notebook:`Download tutorial as notebook<animate_time>`

To animate data across time you need to get the data stored in a |FieldsContainer| labeled in time.

Get the result files
--------------------

First download a result file such as one available with the |Examples| module.
For more information about how to import your own result file in DPF check
the :ref:`ref_tutorials_import_data` tutorial section.

.. jupyter-execute::

>     # Import the ``ansys.dpf.core`` module
>     from ansys.dpf import core as dpf
>     # Import the examples module
>     from ansys.dpf.core import examples
>     # Import the operators module
>     from ansys.dpf.core import operators as ops
>     # Define the result file
>     result_file_path = examples.find_msup_transient()
>     # Create the model
>     model = dpf.Model(data_sources=result_file_path)

Author: ```suggestion
    # Import the ``ansys.dpf.core`` module
    from ansys.dpf import core as dpf
    # Import the examples module
    from ansys.dpf.core import examples
    # Import the operators module
    from ansys.dpf.core import operators as ops
    
    # Define the result file path
    result_file_path = examples.find_msup_transient()
    # Create the model
    my_model = dpf.Model(data_sources=result_file_path)
```

Define a time scoping
---------------------

To animate across time we first need to define the time steps of interest.
Here we get all the time steps available in the |TimeFreqSupport|, but you can also filter them.
For more information on how to define a scoping check the ``Narrow down data`` tutorial in the
:ref:`ref_tutorials_import_data` tutorials section.

.. jupyter-execute::

>     # Get a scoping of all time steps available
>     time_scoping = model.metadata.time_freq_support.time_frequencies

Author: ```suggestion
    # Get a scoping of all time steps available
    time_steps = model.metadata.time_freq_support.time_frequencies
```

Extract the results
-------------------

Extract the results to animate. Here we get the displacement and stress results.

.. note::

    Only locations |Elemental|, |Nodal| or |Faces| are supported for animations.
    |Overall| and |ElementalNodal| locations are not currently supported.

.. jupyter-execute::

>     # Get the displacement fields (already on nodes) at all time steps
>     disp_fc = model.results.displacement(time_scoping=time_scoping).eval()
>     print(disp_fc)

Author: ```suggestion
    # Get the displacement fields (already on nodes) at all time steps
    disp_fc = my_model.results.displacement(time_scoping=time_steps).eval()
    print(disp_fc)
```

.. jupyter-execute::

>     # Get the stress fields on nodes at all time steps
>     stress_fc = model.results.stress.on_location(
>         location=dpf.locations.nodal).on_time_scoping(
>         time_scoping=time_scoping).eval()
>     print(stress_fc)

Author: ```suggestion
    # Get the stress fields on nodes at all time steps
    # The stress is in a ElementalNodal location. Thus we have to change it (here we get a nodal location)
 stress_fc = my_model.results.stress.on_location(location=dpf.locations.nodal).on_time_scoping(time_scoping=time_scope).eval()
    print(stress_fc)
```

Animate the results
-------------------

Animate the results with the |animate| method.
You can animate them on a deformed mesh (animate the color map and the mesh)
or on a static mesh (animate the color map only).

The default behavior of the |animate| method consists in:

> - Showing the norm of the data if multiple components are available;

Author: ```suggestion
- Showing the norm of the data components;
```

- Showing data at the top layer for shells;
- Showing the deformed mesh when animating displacements;
- Showing the static mesh for other types of results;
- Using a constant and uniform scale factor of 1.0 when deforming the mesh.

> You can animate any result on a deformed geometry by also providing displacements in the `deform_by` parameter.

Author: ```suggestion
You can animate any result on a deformed geometry by providing displacement results in the `deform_by` parameter.
```

The geometry can be deformed by a |Result| object, an |Operator| (It must evaluate to a |FieldsContainer|
of same length as the one being animated) or a |FieldsContainer| (also of same length as the one being animated).

.. note::

    The behavior of the |animate| method is defined by a |Workflow| it creates and feeds to an |Animator|.

>     This |Workflow| loops over a |Field| of frame indices and for each frame generates a field of contours
>     to render as well as a displacement field to deform the mesh with if `deform_by` is provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This |Workflow| loops over a |Field| of frame indices and for each frame generates a field of norm contours
    to render, as well as a displacement field to deform the mesh if `deform_by` is provided.
```

>     The behavior of the |animate| method is defined by a |Workflow| it creates and feeds to an |Animator|.
>     This |Workflow| loops over a |Field| of frame indices and for each frame generates a field of contours
>     to render as well as a displacement field to deform the mesh with if `deform_by` is provided.
>     For more information on plots on deformed meshes see: :ref:`ref_plotting_data_on_deformed_mesh`.

Author: ```suggestion
    The behavior of the |animate| method is defined by a |Workflow| that creates and feeds an |Animator|.
    This |Workflow| loops over a |Field| of frame indices and for each frame generates a field of norm contours
    to render, as well as a displacement field to deform the mesh if `deform_by` is provided.
    For more information on plots on deformed meshes see: :ref:`ref_plotting_data_on_deformed_mesh`.
```

.. tab-set::

    .. tab-item:: Deformed mesh

        .. jupyter-execute::
           :hide-output:

            # Animate the stress results on a deformed mesh
            # Use the ``deform_by`` argument and give the displacement results.
            stress_fc.animate(deform_by=disp_fc)

        .. jupyter-execute::
           :hide-code:
           :hide-output:

           stress_fc.animate(off_screen=True,save_as="source/user_guide/tutorials/animate/animate_stress_1.gif",
                               deform_by=disp_fc)

        .. image:: animate_stress_1.gif
           :scale: 50 %
           :align: center

    .. tab-item:: Static mesh

        .. jupyter-execute::
           :hide-output:

            # Animate the stress results in a static geometry
            stress_fc.animate()

        .. jupyter-execute::
           :hide-code:
           :hide-output:

           stress_fc.animate(off_screen=True,save_as="source/user_guide/tutorials/animate/animate_stress_2.gif")

        .. image:: animate_stress_2.gif
           :scale: 50 %
           :align: center

Change the scale factor
-----------------------

You can change the scale factor using:

> a) A single number for a uniform constant scaling.

Author: ```suggestion
- A single number for a uniform constant scaling;
- A list of numbers for a varying scaling (same length as the number of frames).

```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
Uniform constant scaling
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

.. jupyter-execute::
    :hide-output:

    # Define a uniform scale factor
    uniform_scale_factor=10.
    # Animate the displacements
    disp_fc.animate(scale_factor=uniform_scale_factor)

.. jupyter-execute::
    :hide-code:
    :hide-output:

    disp_fc.animate(off_screen=True,save_as="source/user_guide/tutorials/animate/animate_disp_3.gif",
                      scale_factor=uniform_scale_factor, text="Uniform scale factor")

.. image:: animate_disp_3.gif
   :scale: 45 %
   :align: center

> b) A list of numbers for a varying scaling (same length as the number of frames).

Author: ```suggestion
Varying scaling
^^^^^^^^^^
```

.. jupyter-execute::
    :hide-output:

    # Define a varying scale factor
    varying_scale_factor = [i for i in range(len(disp_fc))]
    # Animate the displacements
    disp_fc.animate(scale_factor=varying_scale_factor)

.. jupyter-execute::
    :hide-code:
    :hide-output:

    disp_fc.animate(off_screen=True,save_as="source/user_guide/tutorials/animate/animate_disp_4.gif",
                      scale_factor=varying_scale_factor, text="Varying scale factor")

.. image:: animate_disp_4.gif
   :scale: 45 %
   :align: center

Save the animation
------------------

> You can save the animation using the ``save_as`` argument with a target file path with the desired format as extension.

Author: ```suggestion
You can save the animation using the ``save_as`` argument with a target file path with the desired format as the extension key.
```

> Accepted extensions are ``.gif``, ``.avi`` or ``.mp4`` (see |open_movie|).

Author: ```suggestion
Accepted extensions are:
-  ``.gif``;
- ``.avi``;
- ``.mp4`` 

For more information see |open_movie|.
```

.. jupyter-execute::
   :hide-output:

    # Animate the stress results and save it
    stress_fc.animate(deform_by=disp_fc, save_as="animate_stress.gif")

Control the camera
------------------

Control the camera with the ``cpos`` argument.

> A camera position is a combination of position, focal point (the target), and upwards vector,
> resulting in a list of format:

Author: ```suggestion
A camera position is a combination of:
- A position;
- A focal point (the target);
-  A upwards vector. 

It results in a list of format:
```

.. code-block:: python

    [[pos_x, pos_y, pos_z], [fp_x, fp_y, fp_z], [up_x, up_y, up_z]]

The |animate| method accepts a single camera position or a list of camera positions for each frame.

.. note::
    A tip for defining a camera position is to do a first interactive plot of the data
    with argument ``return_cpos=True``, position the camera as desired in the view, and retrieve
    the output of the plotting command.

Fixed camera
^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. jupyter-execute::
   :hide-output:

   # Define the camera position
   cpos = [[0., 2.0, 0.6], [0.05, 0.005, 0.5], [0.0, 0.0, 1.0]]
   # Animate the stress with a custom fixed camera position
   stress_fc.animate(cpos=cpos)

.. jupyter-execute::
   :hide-code:
   :hide-output:

   stress_fc.animate(save_as="source/user_guide/tutorials/animate/animate_disp_5.gif",
                       cpos=cpos,
                       off_screen=True)

.. image:: animate_disp_5.gif
   :scale: 50 %
   :align: center

Moving camera
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. jupyter-execute::
   :hide-output:

>    # Define the list of camera positions
>    import copy
>    cpos_list = [cpos]
>    # Incrementally decrease the y coordinate of the camera by 0.2 for each frame
>    for i in range(1, len(disp_fc)):
>        new_pos = copy.deepcopy(cpos_list[i-1])
>        new_pos[0][0] += 0.1
>        cpos_list.append(new_pos)
> 
>    # Animate the stress with a moving camera
>    stress_fc.animate(cpos=cpos_list)
> 

Author: ```suggestion
   import copy
   # Define the list of camera positions
   cpos_list = [my_cpos]
   # Incrementally decrease the y coordinate of the camera by 0.2 for each frame
   for i in range(1, len(disp_fc)):
       new_pos = copy.deepcopy(cpos_list[i-1])
       new_pos[0][0] += 0.1
       cpos_list.append(new_pos)

   # Animate the stress with a moving camera
   stress_fc.animate(cpos=cpos_list)

```

.. |Field| replace:: :class:`Field<ansys.dpf.core.field.Field>`
.. |FieldsContainer| replace:: :class:`FieldsContainer<ansys.dpf.core.fields_container.FieldsContainer>`
.. |MeshedRegion| replace:: :class:`MeshedRegion <ansys.dpf.core.meshed_region.MeshedRegion>`
.. |TimeFreqSupport| replace:: :class:`TimeFreqSupport <ansys.dpf.core.time_freq_support.TimeFreqSupport>`
.. |animate| replace:: :func:`FieldsContainer.animate() <ansys.dpf.core.fields_container.FieldsContainer.animate>`
.. |Result| replace:: :class:`Result <ansys.dpf.core.results.Result>`
.. |Operator| replace:: :class:`Operator<ansys.dpf.core.dpf_operator.Operator>`
.. |Workflow| replace:: :class:`Workflow<ansys.dpf.core.workflow.Workflow>`
.. |Elemental| replace:: :class:`elemental<ansys.dpf.core.common.locations>`
.. |ElementalNodal| replace:: :class:`elemental_nodal<ansys.dpf.core.common.locations>`
.. |Nodal| replace:: :class:`nodal<ansys.dpf.core.common.locations>`
.. |Faces| replace:: :class:`faces<ansys.dpf.core.common.locations>`
.. |Overall| replace:: :class:`overall<ansys.dpf.core.common.locations>`
.. |open_movie| replace:: :class:`pyvista.Plotter.open_movie`

> This tutorial shows how to create 3D animations of data in time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial demonstrates how to create 3D animations of data in time.
```

:jupyter-download-script:`Download tutorial as Python script<animate_time>`

> :jupyter-download-notebook:`Download tutorial as notebook<animate_time>`

Author: @PProfizi

> :jupyter-download-notebook:`Download tutorial as notebook<animate_time>`

Reviewer: I like the last option

> :jupyter-download-script:`Download tutorial as Python script<animate_time>`
> 
> :jupyter-download-notebook:`Download tutorial as notebook<animate_time>`

Author: ```suggestion
:jupyter-download-script:`Download tutorial as Python script<animate_time>`  :jupyter-download-notebook:`Download tutorial as Jupyter notebook<animate_time>`
```

> To animate data across time you need to get the data stored in a |FieldsContainer| labeled in time.

Reviewer: hi @JennaPaikowsky,
A FieldsContainer uses labels to identify the fields it stores. For example, if a FieldsContainer stores two fields and has two labels "time" and "test", then each field is identified by a unique combination of values for these two labels. Here, the first field could be for {"time": 0; "test":0}, and the second field could be for {"time":1; "test":0}.

Which is why we say the FieldsContainer must have a "time" label.
Is that a better formulation? `must have a "time" label`

> To animate data across time you need to get the data stored in a |FieldsContainer| labeled in time.

Reviewer 2: Hi @PProfizi, yes "must have a time label" is much clearer.

> To animate data across time, you must store the data in a |FieldsContainer| labeled in time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To animate data across time, you must store the data in a |FieldsContainer| with a ``time`` label.
```
